---
slug: vim-tips
title: vim tips and tricks
authors: tkub
tags: [linux, vim]
---

# VIM tips list

This post is a list of vim tips and tricks i found useful during my never ending jurney of learing vim.

<!-- truncate -->

## Learn vim basic 
You need to know some vim basics to use those tips. Nothing really deep just how to start, leave or change vim mode.
If you have Vim installed, you probably have vimtutor command installed as well.
Just enter your command line and type
```shell
vimtutor
```
to check it out.

## Modes and leaving Vim

### Use ctrl+c to switch to normal mode
There are two ways to switch to normal mode one is to use escape key, but often more convenienient is to use ctrl+c shortcut

Famous leave vim jokes arouse, because users can't enter the normal mode after editing. 

### Leave Vim with multiple files and tabs opened

As you know to quit the editor you need to type

```
:q
```
in normal mode.

To leave Vim with multiple windows and tabs opened use

```
:qa
```

## Baisc edits

### Use vim as simple calculator. In the insert mode press

```
ctrl + r =
```

now enter some calculation and press enter. Result should be visible in text.

### Add any command result to text

In normal mode press

```
:r!date
```

current date will appear in text

### Selecting

#### Select whole line
To quickly select whole line press V
```
V
```

### multi line operations

Enter column selection mode with 
```
ctrl+v
```

select several lines with moving up or down

press 
```
i
```
do line edit and perss 
```
escape
```
your edit should be applied to every line


## Navigating

Beyond normal vim movements like scrolling with 
```
ctrl + f
```
and scrolling backward with
```
ctrl + b
```
there are several very useful commands if you edit source code provided by *CoC* plugin (more about plugins at end of this post).

```
gd
```
will go to function/variable definition 
and
```
gr 
```
will find all variable/function references.


After that you can use go back to last cursor position with

```
ctl+o
```

and forward to last position with 

```
ctl+i
```

### Split windows and navigate between them

The magic command to split vertically is :vsplit command
```
:vs 
```
or
```
ctrl + w v
```

and to split horizontally use :split

```
:sp
```
or
```
ctrl+w s
```

### Navigating between windows and resize

To move around use

```
ctrl+w [arrow key]
```
command.

### Resizing 

increase size
```
ctrl+w +
```
decrease size
```
ctrl+w +
```

make windows size equal
```
ctrl+w =
```

Maximize current window

```
ctrl+w _
```

## File Browser

Vim has built in file browser. You can open it using:

```
:Ex
```
command. 

However it's often more convenienient to use
```
:Lex
```
This one will show up on the left side and open files in a new window on the right of the browser.

### Run Terminal inside vim

Vim has build in terminal plugin. You can open it with
```
:term
```
in the normal mode. This will split your current editor window and create terminal in the upper window.

If you want terminal below current window use
```
:bel term
```
## Copy between editor and terminal

### Copy from the editor to the terminal

Assume you did copy some text into default register (e.g. by using yy coping line), then you can paste it into terminal by using 
```
ctrl+w ""
```

> note: it is possible to copy from other registers as well. To list registers use the :register command


### Copy from the terminal to the editor

It's possible to switch terminal into normal read-only editor by pressing

```
ctrl+w N
```
(it's capital N)

In this mode you can copy whatever you like just like in the normal editor window.

To go back to the terminal mode just press *i* (like insert)

## Snippets

You can define snippets with ab command (abbreviations)

first define abbreviation in normal mode

```
:ab story this is a story to be told
```

then go into insert mode and type 'story'

and press space - text should be changed into 'this is a story to be told'

For more advanced snippets, use [SnipMate](https://github.com/garbas/vim-snipmate) plugin (or any other).


## Macros

You can start recording a macro in vim using 'q' followed by register name.
e.g.

```
qa
```

will start record macro and store it in the 'a' register.

Another 
```
q
```
will stop recoding.

Now pressing 
```
@a
```
will reply previously recorded macro.


## Plugins

### Use decent plugin manager

One modern and easy to use vim plugin manager is [vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug)

### Use NERDTree plugin

[NERDTree](https://github.com/preservim/nerdtree)
is more advanced file browser 
after install just open it with 
```
:NERDTree
```
in normal mode


### Use CoC plugin

[CoC](https://github.com/neoclide/coc.nvim) plugin makes almost IDE like experience from your vim or nvim setup.

It's main purpose is to allow autocompletion, show context code errors and documentation, but one of the most useful is advanced code navigation (like *gd* - 'go to definition' mentioned above)

## Fin

Vim has enormous ecosystem of plugins but also large community (especially if you count both vim and nvim). It's worth to check out vim reddit group for even more tips and interesting plugins.

You may also be interested in [my vim config](https://github.com/tomaszkubacki/configs).
